What is COVID 19?
COVID-19 (Coronavirus disease 2019) is an infectious disease caused by a newly discovered virus “Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2” (SARS - CoV-2)
The new virus & disease were unknown before the outbreak began in Wuhan, China, in December 2019

How does the SARS - CoV-2 virus spreads? 
Virus spreads primarily through droplets when someone comes in contact with an infected person when they cough or sneeze
It also spreads when a person touches a surface or object that has the virus on it, then touches their eyes, nose or mouth

What are the symptoms of COVID-19?
Common symptoms are cough, fever, sore throat & more severe cases will have difficulty in breathing

Whether everybody testing positive with COVID 19 testing kit will be dead?
No. Most people (about 80%) recover from the disease without needing special treatment.
Older people, those with underlying medical problems (high blood pressure, heart problems, diabetes, respiratory illness), undergoing chemotherapy or smokers are more likely to develop serious illness

Is Vaccine or treatment available for COVID 19? 
No. At this time, there are no specific vaccines or treatments for COVID-19.
Hydroxychloroquine & other medications have no clear evidence that they can destroy the coronavirus or have any therapeutic benefit 

How to save yourself from COVID-19?
The only option as of now is to avoid getting yourself infected from this virus
The best available options are:
Social distancing measures 
Proper & regular hand washing 
Using masks when needed 
Quarantine 

What are social distancing measures? 
Social distancing measures are to reduce social interaction between people and to eventually reduce the transmission of coronavirus
Maintain at least 1 metre (3 feet) distance between yourself and anyone who is coughing or sneezing
Avoid non-essential use of public transport & large and small gatherings in public space (In places like restaurants, shopping malls, etc., infection can spread easily in closed spaces where people gather together)
Avoid gatherings with friends and family
Use telephone or online services to contact your doctor or other essential services 

Do I need a special soap to destroy the virus?
No. Just any soap can destroy the virus. Soap molecules will destroy the outer layers of virus but they need a minimum contact time of 20 seconds with soap molecules

What does proper handwashing mean?
Wet your hands with water and apply enough soap to cover your hands
Rub your hands together
Use 1 hand to rub the back of the other hand and clean in between the fingers. Do the same with the other hand
Rub your hands together and clean in between your fingers
Rub the back of your fingers against your palms
Rub your thumb using your other hand. Do the same with the other thumb
Rub the tips of your fingers on the palm of your other hand. Do the same with other hand
Rinse your hands with water and dry your hands completely with a fresh towel
Regular hand washing every 4 hours is recommended to get rid of the virus that is contracted through fomites or from the other people

What kind of Hand sanitizers are needed to handle SARS - CoV -2 virus?
Alcohol-based sanitizers (at least 60% alcohol) can be as effective as soap, only if they are used properly
Just putting a little dollop in the palm and wiping quickly isn't good enough
Rub it all over your hands, between your fingers & on the back of your hands , only then they are as effective as soap and water 

Which one is better? Soap water or Hand Sanitizer
Hand washing with soap and water is found to be more effective in destroying the virus than sanitizers
Most of the commercially available sanitizers won’t have 60% of alcohol as a composition and most of the users don’t know how to use properly 
Hand sanitizers are preferably to be used when soap and water are not available

Do I need to wear masks throughout the day?
No. If you are healthy, you only need to wear a mask if you are taking care of a person with suspected SARS - CoV-2 virus infection or if you are coughing or sneezing
Wear a face mask if you must be around other people, such as during a visit to health care check ups 

What is quarantine and why do we need it? 
Quarantine separates people who may have been exposed to coronavirus to see if they get sick
It lasts for as long as the upper limit of the virus' incubation period (the time between being exposed and showing symptoms) which is around 14 days
Isolation is separating the sick person from others and it lasts for as long as person is free of symptoms and test negative for the virus

Why we have to cooperate with quarantine?
To stop the transmission of virus and to control the number of cases 
Highly infectious nature of this virus makes it spread very rapidly and rise in number of active cases which eventually leads to burden on health system 

What we should do if any family members start suffering from fever, cough and sneezing?
Isolate the individual in the house and if possible provide a separate room with attached bathroom 
Clean the surfaces that may be contaminated with stools or any bodily fluids
Clean high-touch surfaces (doorknobs, phones, bedside tables, table tops, toilets, bathroom fixtures) daily 
Continue monitoring symptoms daily & if they worsen contact your health care provider immediately 

What to do when you cough/sneeze?
Try to cover your mouth & nose with a tissue
Immediately throw tissues in garbage and wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or if not available, clean with hand sanitizer that has at least 60% alcohol 

What you should not do during this COVID 19 pandemic?
Neglecting the advises of your health care provider and authorities
Smoking or using or taking antibiotics of your choice 
Wearing multiple masks 






